

Table of Contents
List of Participants
Narrative 
Enhancing the Humanities  
Environmental Scan  
History of the Project  
Work Plan 
Final Product and Dissemination
Biographies 
Appendices 
List of Participants 
Sal Girma
 Kayla Corbin 

Narrative- Enhancing the Humanities
Music more specifically hip hop has been influential since its development. Hip hop has become a major phenomenon and the corner stone or pop culture. It is important to study and analyze musical movements and their influence. Similar to jazz in the 20s, hip hop in the 90s and early 2000s was revolutionary, and the subject matter had major impact on the people consuming it. Hip Hop in the 90s and now heavily influences the youth in terms of the way important topics are discussed. Music has shaped the narratives behind politics, social justice issues, and love to name a few.   
Many arguments have been made against hip hop because the assumption is that it promotes violence and that it’s divisive. Often this genre of music has been discounted because of the use of foul language such as cussing and the explicit content that is pervasive in the lyrics of songs. However, that’s not the case, hip hop has done so much for the world and it’s important to focus on the promotion of love and connection that hip hop provides. Hip hop promotes love by expressing the forms of love that are present in predominantly African American communities along with promoting connection between those that have similar experiences that artists speak of in their music.  
This project seeks to address humanities questions that showcase the influence of hip hop and R&B music in the topic of love. The humanities questions that we will be asked and assessed are the following: How has the language used to describe love in R&B and hip hop music changed over time, specifically between 1997-2005? How does artist collaboration affect the top 100 billboard charts? How has the language used now compared to that of 90s R&B and hip hop impacted the popularity on  the top 100 billboard charts? 
The plan is to use the top 100 billboard charts as a source of data and tool of comparison from which we would implement digital humanities methods. The years 1997-2005 were specifically chosen because that was the peak period of R&B and hip hop collaboration, during this time we had music that is still listened to and is influential today, whether that be through current remixes or mashup the music of that time is still very relevant. The digital humanities methods we plan on implementing are networks and topic modeling. Networks take data and create connections through nodes and vertices. Nodes are points and vertices are lines that connect these nodes or points. A network showcases the connections of these nodes or points and the vertices showcases how the nodes are connected. With this study we plan on using networks to showcase the interactions between various R&B and hip hop artists and how often certain artists collaborated, then we would take that data and compare it to the songs were towards the top 50 on the 100 billboard charts. Another way we would enhance the use of networks is by having a node list that consists of various characteristics such as: artist, name, gender, and year born/age.  A sample network would show nodes where there is artist one and artist two and a vertice that connects them is the song they have written or performed together. 
The second digital humanities topic that will be used is topic modeling. Topic modeling is used to identify patterns within a set of data. These patterns are found by analyzing the words within that specific data set. Then these words are clusters together if they have a recurring pattern of appearance. The data set that will again be used is R&B and hip hop charts from 1997-2005. The use of the same data is to provide consistency throughout the study. Topic modeling will be very be beneficial in understanding the themes that are present, one of which we assume will be love. Looking specifically at the category of love we will be able to track the changes of language over time and the popularity that has followed or that has not with the change of language. 
This project will overall enhance the humanities by studying the past music and looking at the scope of R&B and hip hop in the discussions of love. The study of music is vital and important because music is a form of not only expression but also music shapes identity and community along with circulating ideologies of culture and social issues.  

Environmental Scan 
When doing research to find projects that are similar to the one that this grant aims to conduct I have come across a couple that are similar. Two projects that are similar in the topic area that we are pursuing is the “Hip Hop in Japan” project and the “Linked Jazz” project. While these two were similar many of the projects that came up related to sound and music.
Unlike this project the ones that appeared heavily focused on the sound behind music and analyzing the changes in the rhythm and tones within the songs. Their studies aim to create a software or program that addresses and analyzes these changes. Other types of digital humanities projects that came up focus on music other than hip hop, one specific project was titled “The Italian Opera Aria on the London stage 1705-1801.” Similar to how we are focusing on Love in R&B and hip hop music through the top 100 billboard music charts, this project has a very specific aim and target as well. When coming across projects like this one, although the topic is not similar to the one we are doing, it is important to understand how they are conducting the experiment. 
The two projects that are similar to the one we are conducting again are “Hip Hop in Japan” and “Linked Jazz.” “Hip Hop in Japan” looks at the spread of hip hop on a global setting by examining music videos, and words of japanese hip hop artists and contrasted that to japanese “pop, folk, rock, enka and children’s music.”  This is an interesting take on analyzing how the music has been influential, especially contrasting it to children’s music was particularly interesting. When reflecting on implementing it into our project, the problem is the data set that we are using is already so large. 
The other similar project is “Linked Jazz,” this project not only focuses on Jazz music but also the connection between artists and collaborators. The difference is that this project also looks at documents during that time period to further analyze the connection. Reflecting back on our project we in a way add room for further analysis by incorporating the aspect of the popularity of the music based on these various aspects.  In the way that the “Linked Jazz” project enhances its purpose by including physical documents, in our project we are using our data, topic models and networks to reflect back on the topic we are studying giving us room for more discovery. 
Our project further enhances the studies being completed because it incorporates aspects of works already being done and it can serve as a reference for projects like “Hip Hop in Japan” to see how influential  hip hop in the US specifically on the topic of love. This project also enhances the humanities by contributing such a specific project that can be used to explore further impacts of music. This project can be taken further and examine how social justice and other issues that are pressing to society have influenced hip hop and R&B music. 

History of the Project 
	
The preliminary research for this project involved a lot of inquiry into access. The first thing we had to do in order to build the networks was to create or find a database to pull from. We wanted to use popular R&B and Hip Hop songs so we used the Billboard charts. Billboard has an open access archive online starting from charts in the 1950s all the way up to current charts. One of our first steps was finding/designing code that would pull the information from the database for the years we wanted to focus in on. In addition to using the Billboard archives we also had to find lyrics to the songs in order to create the topic models that were produced from the songs in our networks. The topic models would be organized similar to the Signs@40 project designed by Signs Journal. In order to do such a thing we had to find a database with lyrics and find/create a code that could pull the lyrics from our songs and topic model them. Coming up with a list of stop words was a challenge because we wanted to make sure we didn’t get useless words, but also that we didn’t discount words that could be really important when put in context. 
We are currently seeking funding to jumpstart this project and have considered partnering with Billboard in order to sustain our final project. If Billboard collaborated with us, we would be able to publish our findings online and give free access to the general public. The public would be able to go online and interact with the project, and make comments to help us improve it.

Work Plan 
Our plan is to create both an interactive network and a topic model using our Hip Hop and R&B databases. 
Using code we designed, we are drawing from Billboard’s Hot 100 Chart Archives to compile a list of songs. The first two months of the project will be devoted to tweaking the network design. Because one of our main focuses in the network is collaboration, we plan on facing some difficulty in terms of design. We want to make sure that you can view the network multiple ways, by artist, gender and song. Sal Girma is in charge of the design aspect, making sure that such a large amount of data is still made easy to understand, and that the network is able to be followed without too much confusion. 
Secondly, I, (Kayla Corbin) will be in charge of tweaking the design of the topic model. Using the code we designed, I will take the lyrics of the songs from our network and create a topic model. Because we want the topic model to be interactive, we want to have as many as possible and label them according to category. While Sal Girma is working on the network, I will be working on selecting topic models that should stay and others that aren’t deemed as useful. 
One of the major risks of this project is that because we are using such a large database the network can be hard to follow and not user friendly for the general public. Another risk stems from our use of Topic Modeling, you have to take your time and go through the groups created by topic modeling in order to make sure they’re useful and provide some sort of knowledge. Therefore, a lot of our work will be dedicated to tweaking the codes used to create our networks and our topic models. One of the major goals of the project is to create knowledge. Therefore we need to go over the songs that we have compiled, and look over the lyrics in order to better create a list of stop words. It’s not efficient to manually read every lyric of every song, so after creating a list of general stop words we will randomly select 500 songs to read ourselves. Hip hop and R&B are both genres that use a lot of adlibs and it’s important to make sure we don’t get topic models full of them. 
The final design should take 3 months to complete since we already have some code and a database to work with. The networking design should take a month, as well as the topic modeling, the rest of the time will be figuring out a design/format so that the project is interactive and appealing to the public. 
Since we plan on publishing our project online, we will monitor the website traffic. We will look at how many times the website is visited, what people spend the most time looking at and what people spend the least time looking at. This will help us be able to make design changes and make the website more user friendly. We plan on leaving a comment section in the website, in order to get feedback. Lastly, we will hire a team of evaluators to evaluate the efficiency of our project and our web design to make sure the project lives up to its original intention; to create a user friendly, interactive project that expands people’s knowledge on Hip Hop and R&B and allows them to see the genres in a different way. 
Final Project/Dissemination
The main platform of our project will be online. Our intent is to partner with Billboard once the project is done, and hopefully we can replicate this project with other genres and different years. We would go through a similar process with the different genres, using Billboard to help create a  dataset and use our code to create a network and topic model the lyrics. The original website will be open access, available to the general public, with links to our sources and access to our full database of songs. The website will also have audio options available, so when they are clicked on it that portion of the project can be read aloud by an automated voice. Therefore, people with visual impairments can access it with assistance. Our dataset will be available digitally, but we will also have physical copies available. The purpose of making our data set open is because our data and findings can be furthered by other projects, like the ones mentioned earlier in the proposal that specifically study the vocals and audio of music. We plan on presenting our project at the University of Richmond, at a presentation open to the general public. At the presentation, we will have physical copies of our data set, and printed versions of our networks, as well as our topic models. During our presentation we will have an ASL translator for the hearing impaired. We also plan on allowing anyone who visits the site access to the code we used to develop our project.
Bios
Kayla Corbin is a researcher in the field of Digital Humanities. A student at University of Richmond, Corbin is proficient in coding and data analysis. As a minor in both American Studies and History, Corbin has extensive knowledge of the humanities field, and often combines that knowledge with her technical ability to create new knowledge. One of her major roles in the project is to create and design the topic model. Using her knowledge of coding, she will be able to fulfill this responsibility. 
Sal Girma is a current student at the University of Richmond. Her knowledge of digital humanities extends beyond the class that she has taken. With her major being in Leadership studies she has a plethora of knowledge in the humanities. Along with double minors in healthcare studies and women gender and sexuality studies, her knowledge and interest in the humanities spans even further. Through this course she has learned how to code and incorporate various forms of digital humanities such as topic modeling and networking, which are both methods that will be used in this grant. 
Apendecises

"Billboard Charts Archive." Billboard. Accessed December 20, 2018. https://www.billboard.com/archive/charts.

Bühler, Peter, Patrick Schlaich, and Dominik Sinner. "PDF-Grundlagen." PDF Bibliothek Der Mediengestaltung, 2018, 2-11. doi:10.1007/978-3-662-54615-4_1.

"Contemporary R&B." Wikipedia. December 18, 2018. Accessed December 20, 2018. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Contemporary_R&B.

Hip-Hop Japan." HyperStudio Digital Humanities at MIT HipHop Japan Comments. Accessed December 20, 2018. http://hyperstudio.mit.edu/projects/hip-hop-japan/.

"Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs." Wikipedia. December 18, 2018. Accessed December 20, 2018. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hot_R&B/Hip-Hop_Songs.

List of R&B Musicians." Wikipedia. November 17, 2018. Accessed December 20, 2018. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_R&B_musicians.

Linked Jazz. Accessed December 20, 2018. https://linkedjazz.org/.

"Topic Model." Signs at 40. Accessed December 20, 2018. http://signsat40.signsjournal.org/topic-model/.

Westrup, Jack. "Simile Aria (opera)." Oxford Music Online, 2002. doi:10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.o007501.

Yurtoğlu, Nadir.             "Http://www.historystudies.net/dergi//birinci-dunya-savasinda-bir-asayis-sorunu-sebinkarahisar-ermeni-isyani20181092a4a8f.pdf." History Studies International Journal of History10, no. 7 (2018): 241-64. doi:10.9737/hist.2018.658.
